hey this is fresh tell Walker here's a
portion of an email i received hi i'm
lucas from brazil and i love your videos
here's a problem from a book with math
problems that i could not solve and the
book doesn't say the answer it just said
this one we leave to the students i
translated the problem for you and i'm
also sending you a photo of the original
problem and the book link from where i
got the problem i was so grateful to
Lucas I replied right away thanks for
writing and for translating - I
appreciate the original photo so what
was the problem it was a false proof
that 3 is equal to 0 here's how it
starts let x be a solution of x squared
plus X plus 1 equals 0 since X is not
equal to 0 we can divide both sides by X
let's simplify this to the following
form we have X plus 1 plus 1 over X is
equal to 0 now from the first equation
we have X plus 1 is equal to negative x
squared we're going to substitute that
into the second equation so that first X
plus 1 becomes negative x squared then
we have plus 1 over X is equal to 0
we'll now rearrange this equation to get
1 over X is equal to x squared this
means 1 is equal to X cubed so X is
equal to 1 we now take x equals 1 and
substitute it into our original equation
x squared plus X plus 1 equals 0 we get
1 squared plus 1 plus 1 is equal to 0
which means 3 is equal to 0 this is
clearly a nonsensical result but every
single step seemed to be correct so
where is the mistake
in this false proof that three is equal
to zero can you figure it out give this
problem a try and when you're ready keep
watching the video for the explanation
so let's take a look at this false proof
which step introduces the mistake from
which the ultimate result of three
equals zero originates that would be
between the second and third steps where
we substitute X plus 1 is equal to
negative x squared the problem with this
step is that it creates an extraneous
solution x equals 1 which is not a
solution to the original equation x
squared plus X plus 1 equals 0
so let me explain that in a little bit
more detail we start out where X is a
solution of x squared plus X plus 1
equals 0
so far so good this has two solutions
which we can get from the quadratic
formula we have negative 1 plus I times
the square root of 3 all over 2 and we
have negative 1 minus I times the square
root of 3 all over 2 now X is not equal
to 0 so it is valid for us to divide
both sides by X now we have a new
equation X plus 1 plus 1 over X is equal
to 0 this equation again has the same
two solutions so far so good
now we're going to substitute X plus 1
is equal to negative x squared we get
the equation negative x squared plus 1
over X is equal to 0 now what happens
when you solve this equation well you
end up with another solution so you have
the same two solutions as before but
then you end up with the new solution of
x equals 1 notice if you substitute x
equals 1 into this equation you end up
with negative 1 plus 1 equals 0 so x
equals 1 is a solution to this equation
but it was not a solution to the
previous two equations so the lesson is
that when we've substituted X plus 1 is
equal to negative x squared we've got an
equation that has another solution and
this is not a solution to the original
equation x squared plus X plus 1 is
equal to 0
so you have to be careful if a step
introduces an extraneous solution
or else you could end up with a
nonsensical result like three is equal
to zero did you identify where the
mistake originated thanks for watching
this video please subscribe to my
channel I make videos on math you can
catch me on my blog mind your decisions
if you like this video you can check out
my books which are linked in the video
description and you can support me on
patreon if you have a topic suggestion
or a puzzle you can email me brush at
mind your decisions calm and you can
catch me on social media either
mind your decisions or at presh tell
walker